Document using authd with NFS and Samba (#672)
ubuntu/authd: docs/howto/use-with-nfs.md

# Using authd with NFS

The UIDs and GIDs assigned to users and groups by authd are unique to each
machine. This means that when using authd with NFS, the UIDs and GIDs of users
and groups on the NFS server will not match those on the client machines, which
leads to permission issues.

To avoid these issues, you can use NFS with ID mapping and Kerberos. This

> ensures that the UIDs and GIDs of users and groups are mapped correctly across

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ensures that the UIDs and GIDs are mapped correctly across
```

all machines.

> ## Setting Up NFS with IDMAP and Kerberos

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Setting up NFS with IDMAP and Kerberos
```

This guide will walk you through setting up an NFS server with ID mapping and
Kerberos authentication. The user `alice` will be able to access a shared
directory on the server from a client machine.

---

> ### Steps for the Server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Steps for the server
```

> #### Step 1: Install Required Packages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Step 1: Install required packages
```

> 1. **Install Packages:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Install packages:**
```

   On the NFS server, run:

>    ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ```text
```

Generally, syntax highlighting is not very helpful for terminal commands (relative to code samples) and can be inconsistent with the user's terminal.

   sudo apt install -y nfs-kernel-server nfs-common rpcbind krb5-user krb5-admin-server krb5-kdc
   ```

> 2. **Handle Kerberos Configuration Prompts:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Handle Kerberos configuration prompts:**
```

   During the installation of `krb5-user`, you will be prompted to provide configuration details for Kerberos. Here's what to enter:

   - **Default Kerberos version 5 realm:**
     Enter the Kerberos realm name, which is the uppercase version of your domain. For example:
     ```
     EXAMPLE.COM
     ```

   - **Kerberos servers for your realm:**
     Enter the hostname of the Key Distribution Center (KDC). Assuming the KDC is on the same host as the NFS server:
     ```
     server.example.com
     ```

   - **Administrative server for your Kerberos realm:**
     Enter the hostname of the Kerberos admin server, which is also the same as the NFS server in this case:
     ```
     server.example.com
     ```

---

#### Step 2: Configure Kerberos

1. **Create the Realm:**

>    ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ```text
```

   sudo krb5_newrealm
   ```
   Follow the prompts to set up the Kerberos realm.

> 2. **Add Principals:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Add principals:**
```

>    In Kerberos, a principal is a unique identity used for authentication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   In Kerberos, a principal is a unique identity that is used for authentication.
```

   - Add a principal for the NFS server:
     This principal is used by the NFS client to authenticate when mounting an NFS directory.

>      ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     ```text
```

     sudo kadmin.local addprinc -randkey nfs/server.example.com
     ```

   - Add a principal for the user `alice`:
     This principal is used for authentication when the user accesses the mounted NFS directory.

>      ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     ```text
```

     sudo kadmin.local addprinc alice
     ```
     Set a password for the user `alice`.

3. **Generate Keytabs:**

   A *keytab* is a file that contains Kerberos principals and their associated secret keys. It allows services (such as NFS) to authenticate without needing to input a password each time.

   - Export the keytab for the NFS server and the user `alice`:

>      ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     ```text
```

     sudo kadmin.local ktadd -k /etc/krb5.keytab nfs/server.example.com
     ```

---

> #### Step 3: Configure NFS Server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Step 3: Configure the NFS server
```

> 1. **Create and Configure the Shared Directory:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Create and configure the shared directory:**
```

>    You’ll need to create the directory to share via NFS and configure the `/etc/exports` file to define it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   You’ll need to create the directory to share via NFS and configure the directory in the `/etc/exports` file.
```

   - **Create a directory owned by `alice`:**

>      ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     ```text
```

     sudo mkdir -p /srv/nfs/shared/alice
     sudo chown alice:alice /srv/nfs/shared/alice
     ```

   - **Configure exports:**
     Edit the `/etc/exports` file to define the shared directory:

>      ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     ```text
```

     sudo editor /etc/exports
     ```

>      Add a line like this:

Reviewer: why "like this"?

```suggestion
     Add this line:
```

>      ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     ```text
```

     /srv/nfs/shared *(rw,sync,no_subtree_check,sec=krb5)
     ```

2. **Configure IDMAP:**
   Edit the IDMAP configuration:

>    ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ```text
```

   sudo editor /etc/idmapd.conf
   ```
   Ensure the following is set:

>    ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ```ini
```

   [General]
   Domain = example.com
   ```

> 3. **Restart Services:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Restart services:**
```

>    Restart the required services:

Reviewer: Simple repeats the header.

If additional context can be given in the text then provide it, otherwise the text might be removed as redundant.

Author: > otherwise the text might be removed as redundant.

done

>    ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ```text
```

   sudo systemctl restart nfs-kernel-server rpcbind rpc-svcgssd
   ```

> 4. **Verify Running Services:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. **Verify running services:**
```

   Check the status of the relevant services:

>    ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ```text
```

   sudo systemctl status nfs-kernel-server rpcbind rpc-svcgssd
   ```

---

> ### Steps for the Client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Steps for the client
```

> #### Step 1: Install Required Packages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Step 1: Install required packages
```

> 1. **Install Packages:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Install packages:**
```

   On the NFS client, run:

>    ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ```text
```

   sudo apt install -y nfs-common krb5-user rpcbind
   ```

> 2. **Handle Kerberos Configuration Prompts:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Handle Kerberos configuration prompts:**
```

   During the installation of `krb5-user`, you will be prompted to provide configuration details for Kerberos again. Enter the same details as before:

   - **Default Kerberos version 5 realm:**
     ```
     EXAMPLE.COM
     ```

   - **Kerberos servers for your realm:**
     ```
     server.example.com
     ```

   - **Administrative server for your Kerberos realm:**
     ```
     server.example.com
     ```

---

> #### Step 2: Copy the Kerberos Keytab file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Step 2: Copy the Kerberos keytab file
```

> 1. **Copy Keytab File:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Copy keytab file:**
```

>    Securely copy the keytab from the server to the client:

Reviewer: in the commands, the keytab is being copied and access permissions are also being modified -- consider stating the latter also.

Author: done

>    ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ```text
```

   scp root@server.example.com:/etc/krb5.keytab /tmp/krb5.keytab && \
   sudo mv /tmp/krb5.keytab /etc/krb5.keytab && \
   sudo chown root:root /etc/krb5.keytab && \
   sudo chmod 600 /etc/krb5.keytab
   ```

---

#### Step 3: Configure NFS client

1. **Configure IDMAP:**
   Edit the IDMAP configuration:

>    ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ```text
```

   sudo editor /etc/idmapd.conf
   ```
   Ensure the following is set:

>    ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ```ini
```

   [General]
   Domain = example.com
   ```

2. **Restart services:**

>    ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ```text
```

   sudo systemctl restart nfs-client.target rpc-gssd.service rpcbind.service
   ```

3. **Verify Running Services:**
   Check the status of the relevant services:
   ```bash
   sudo systemctl status nfs-client.target rpc-gssd.service auth-rpcgss-module.service rpcbind.service
   ```

---

> #### Step 4: Mount the NFS Share

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Step 4: Mount the NFS share
```

Mount the shared directory with Kerberos security:
```bash
sudo -u alice mkdir /home/alice/nfs
sudo mount -t nfs4 -o sec=krb5 server.example.com:/srv/nfs/shared/alice /home/alice/nfs
```

---

> #### Step 5: Obtain Kerberos Ticket

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Step 5: Obtain Kerberos ticket
```

Log in as the user `alice` and authenticate:
```bash
kinit alice
```

Verify the ticket:
```bash
klist
```

---

> ### Step 6: Test and Debug

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 6: Test and debug
```

> 1. **Test Access to the Share:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Test access to the share:**
```

   As the user alice, try accessing the share:
   ```bash
   ls -la /home/alice/nfs
   ```

   Create a test file to verify write access:
   ```bash
   touch /home/alice/nfs/test
   ```

> 2. **Check Logs if Issues Arise:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Check logs if issues arise:**
```

   - On the server:
     ```bash
     sudo journalctl -u nfs-kernel-server -u rpcbind -u rpc-svcgssd
     ```

   - On the client:
     ```bash
     sudo journalctl -u rpcbind -u rpc-gssd
     ```

---

### Cleanup

If you no longer need the NFS share or want to clean up the configuration, follow these steps:

> #### On the Server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### On the server
```

1. **Purge installed packages:**
   ```bash
   sudo apt purge "krb*" "nfs-*"
   ```

2. **Remove Kerberos configuration and data:**
   ```bash
   sudo sh -c "rm -rf /etc/krb5* /var/lib/krb5kdc/* /tmp/krb5*"
   ```

> 3. **Remove the Shared Directory:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Remove the shared directory:**
```

   ```bash
   sudo rm -rf /srv/nfs/shared
   sudo rmdir /srv/nfs
   ```

> #### On the Client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### On the client
```
